
          Welcome to the world of Interactive Target Compilation
          ------------------------------------------------------

This is a Public Domain version of RAM Technology Systems IRTC for the
Microchip PIC16Cxx range of microcontrollers. The host Forth is Tom Zimmers F-PC
with IRTC built onto that. This is NOT AN ANSII FORTH! and probabley never will
be as the spec does not allow for stack size switching on the fly and this is
a Meta Compiler not a native Forth.

This program is limited to the PIC16C84, E2PROM device, and MUST NOT be used
with any EPROM device, like the 16C71, as the programming algorithm will KILL it.

To use the interactive nature of Forth and IRTC you will need a Smart-ICEPIC
module to program your 84 and allow development. The circuit for the ICEPIC
is in the CIRCUIT.GIF file and the parts list in PARTS.TXT. If you have the
equipment and knowledge to build from this information please feel free to do
so. If you would like a kit of parts, including PCB, box and all cables
please use the order form on our Web page,

        http://ourwourld.compuserve.com/homepages/RAMTech

or FAX us on +44 1258 456410
or write to us at:

        RAM Technology Systems
        c/o Wyvern InnLeisure
        Clump Farm Indst. Est.
        Blandford
        Dorset
        DT11 7TD
        UK

For those without the knowledge, complete kits that need no soldering are
also available.

We trust that you will find IRTC so benificial that you would like to program
ALL the serial programmed PICs, from the 61 to 74 and beyond. The full vertion of 
IRTC is available from the above source ONLY.

Documentation is on-line with IRTC but more complete in the IRTC manual which
is available in printed form or as a download from the Web.

This compiler is released into the Public Domain. As such you may not earn 
money out of selling it but you are encouraged to use and distribute copies. 
RAM Technology Systems has the copywrite to the source code of IRTC and this code 
is not released, only the executables are.

May the Forth be with you.

Alan M Robertson
