			    PYGTOOLS.ZIP
		  Copyright 1994  by L. G. Lisle
							    22 August 1994

   This is my second public release of Basic PYGTOOLS.  It is now a subset
of my Full PYGTOOLS library which is available only from me.  There are
more than 1000 words included in the Basic package.  They cover a wide
range of topics including:
     basic tools, F83 compatibility, double number math, advanced integer 
     math, system utilities, advance terminal I/O, debugging tools, 
     hardware device drivers and many others. 
To explore these tools, move the files to a directory containing PYGMY.COM 
and enter: BP       For more help  press:  F1.


BUGS

   I've used most of these tools for some time, therefore, most of the bugs 
are, hopefully, squashed.  On the other hand, some of the code is still 
somewhat experimental.  If you are the first to send me a bona fide bug 
report, I'll give you a $5 credit on your registration.  If you fix it, 
I'll give you the registration free.


FILES

   Files in this public distribution include:

	BPTOOLS.SCR     the source code for the tools
	BP.COM          a compiled version of PYGMY with my changes
	HELPS.SCR       a collection of help screens
	BPYGTOOL.TXT    documentation and help
	PYGFILES.TXT    a list of files in each package
	READ.ME         this file 
	FILE_ID.DIZ     a description file


REGISTRATION

   I am asking a registration fee of $15 to encourage me to continue making
these tools available.  To encourage you to register, I am offering to send 
you:
	 the latast source code for the tools with their shadows
	 the documentation and help file for full tool set, 
	 full information on my changes to PYGMY
	 a recompilation of Brad Rodriguez' tools in GET form
	 a menu program to make access easier
	
   For $25 I am offering the Full PYGTOOLS library, which includes an 
additional set of utilities.  See PYGFILES.TXT, BPYGTOOL.TXT  and 
screens u9-11 for details.

   Please indicate desired media size, and send all communications to:

		       Lyle Greg Lisle, P.E.  
		       2160 Foxhunter Ct.
		       Winston-Salem, NC  27106
		       Internet:  L.SQUARED@GENIE.COM
