
                Notes on the Congenial Screen Editor
                    in Wil Baden &al's F83S6
                      Public Domain Forth


        Wil Baden, Roland Koluvek and others combined forces at various
times in 1985-1987 to produce an upgrade of the original Laxen & Perry
F83 public domain impelementation of the Forth 83-STANDARD. Successive
revisions of this system were called F83X, F83Y and later, F83S for
S-eparated headers.

        One of the noteworthy features of the Baden &al system F83S6
is the Congenial Screen File Editor. This editor has never been, to 
my knowledge, documented in any fashion. Increasingly I find myself
on the phone explaining to friends who have download F83S6.ARC from
the RealTime Control & Forth Board ( 303-278-0364 3/12/24 24 hours)
how to work the screen editor.

        This file will hopefully reduce my phone time!

        I. Invoking the Congenial Editor

        Open or create a Forth BLOCK file using OPEN <existing-file-name>
        or CREATE-FILE <new-file-name>.

        List a screen, for instance screen zero, with 0 LIST.

        Type  V <cr>  at the Forth  ok  prompt. Your cursor will hop up
        to inside the edit screen and you will be in type-over mode.

                A. Key Presses

                Esc will leave the Congenial Editor. In Forth, the Escape
                key will repeat the last command issued. Therefore, if
                you type V to enter the editor, hit Esc to leave it, and
                keep hitting Esc, you will hop into and out of the editor.

                The Ins key will toggle between insert and typeover mode
                All the arrow keys will work.

                PgUp will list the previous screen.

                PgDn will list the next screen.

                Home will toggle between the top left corner of the screen
                and the end of text on the screen.

                End will toggle between the front of the current line and
                the end of text on the current line.

                <CR> will advance to the next line. If the current line is
                indented from the left edge, the cursor will appear on the
                next line at the same indentation; otherwise, it will appear
                in the far left column

                Del will backspace the cursor destructively over text to the
                left of the cursor, drawing back all text on the current line
                which is to the right of the cursor.

                The Backspace key in type-over mode destructively backs over
                the text to the left of the cursor. In insert mode, it will
                also draw the text to the right of the cursor back, just as
                the Del key.

                B. Control Keys ( described here as ^A, ^B, etc.)

                Definition of terms: a "Lexical Unit" is a blank-delimited
                character string of one or more non-blank characters.

                In the Congenial Editor, the following control-keys have
                the following effects:

                ^A Retreat to first character of previous lexical unit.

                ^C List next screen.

                ^F Advance cursor to first char of next complete lexical unit.

                ^G "Suck up" the next character on the line, drawing the
                   rest of the line to right of cursor back to the left.

                ^H Same as the Backspace key.

                ^M Same as <CR>.

                ^N Split line at cursor. Line 15 of the screen is discarded.

                ^Q Move cursor out of screen to top left awaiting a second
                   key stroke. Execute the QMENU command indicated by second
                   key stroke. For a full listing of these commands, type
                   QMENU while in Forth. Example: ^Q1 makes the lexical unit
                   at the cursor lowercase, ^Q2 makes it uppercase.

                ^R List previous screen.

                ^T Delete next lexical unit from the current line disregarding
                   leading spaces. Draw back rest of line left towards the
                   cursor. If executed at the end of text on a line, or on
                   a blank line, draw up as many complete lexical units from
                   the next non-blank line as will fit to the right of the
                   cursor on the current line, while drawing back the "robbed"
                   line to the left. Deleted unit is kept at an edit pad. See
                   function key notes.

                ^Y Delete current line. Deleted line is kept at edit pad. See
                   function-key notes.

                C. Function keys.

                F1 Gives a menu of F-keys and control-key commands. You may
                   wish to view the source for these Forth words to understand
                   what they do.

                F2 Updates and saves currently-listed screen to disk.

                F4 Inserts previously deleted text currently residing in
                   edit buffer at cursor.

                F5 Toggles between the last two screens upon which LIST has
                   been invoked, either by explicitly typing <n> LIST from
                   Forth, or by various Congenial Editor operations.

                F6 Copies a line from remembered cursor position on previously
                   listed screen to cursor position on currently listed 
                   screen, pushing rest of screen down ond line. Line 15 of
                   the current screen is lost. The line being copied is not
                   disturbed on its screen of origin. The F5 key is used
                   in conjunction with this key to toggle between the two
                   screens in order to set the cursor positions.

                F7 Toggles between the current screen and the corresponding
                   shadow screen, traditionally reserved for comments.

                F8 Datestamps the current screen. To change the user ID, from
                   within Forth type NEW-ID. You will be prompted for a three-
                   letter ID. The time will be obtained from DOS.

        II. Help with the Congenial Editor.

        This has not been an exhaustive exposition of the power of the
        Congenial Screen Editor, but it should be enough to get you
        started. Here are some suggestions if you find you are puzzled.

        - Read the Source Code, it's there in the F83S6.ARC file.

        - Type QMENU <cr> for a list of the ^Q-and-key sequences
          supported from within the Congenial Editor.

        - Press F1 from within the Congenial Editor for a list of
          the Forth words executed by various F-key and ^-key combinations.
          You will then perhaps wish to use SEE <wordname> from the
          regular Forth command line to try to discern just what
          these various words do.

        - Open or create a test file and play with it for a while! The
          Congenial Editor is fun! I find new functionality in it as
          I explore it still, and I been using it for two years! 

        Good luck!

                        Jack Woehr


